It is told among the wise that the First War began before Arda was full-shaped, 
and ere yet there was anything that grew or walked upon earth; and for long 
Melkor had the upper hand. But in the midst of the war a spirit of great strength 
and hardihood came to the aid of the Valar, hearing in the far heaven that there 
was battle in the Little Kingdom; and Arda was filled with the sound of his 
laughter. So came Tulkas the Strong, whose anger passes like a mighty wind, 
scattering cloud and darkness before it; and Melkor fled before his wrath and his 
laughter, and forsook Arda, and there was peace for a long age. And Tulkas 
remained and became one of the Valar of the Kingdom of Arda; but Melkor 
brooded in the outer darkness, and his hate was given to Tulkas for ever after. 

In that time the Valar brought order to the seas and the lands and the 
mountains, and Yavanna planted at last the seeds that she had long devised. And 
since, when the fires were subdued or buried beneath the primeval hills, there 
was need of light, Aule at the prayer of Yavanna wrought two mighty lamps for 
the lighting of the Middle-earth which he had built amid the encircling seas. 
Then Varda filled the lamps and Manwe hallowed them, and the Valar set them 
upon high pillars, more lofty far than are any mountains of the later days. One 
lamp they raised near to the north of Middle-earth, and it was named Illuin; and 
the other was raised in the south, and it was named Ormal; and the light of the 
Lamps of the Valar flowed out over the Earth, so that all was lit as it were in a 
changeless day. 

Then the seeds that Yavanna had sown began swiftly to sprout and to burgeon, 
and there arose a multitude of growing things great and small, mosses and 
grasses and great ferns, and trees whose tops were crowned with cloud as they 
were living mountains, but whose feet were wrapped in a green twilight. And 
beasts came forth and dwelt in the grassy plains, or in the rivers and the lakes, or 
walked in the shadows of the woods. As yet no flower had bloomed nor any bird 
had sung, for these things waited still their time in the bosom of Yavanna; but 
wealth there was of her imagining, and nowhere more rich than in the midmost 
parts of the Earth, where the light of both the Lamps met and blended. And there 
upon the Isle of Almaren in the Great Lake was the first dwelling of the Valar 
when all things were young, and new-made green was yet a marvel in the eyes of 
the makers; and they were long content. 

Now it came to pass that while the Valar rested from their labours, and 
watched the growth and unfolding of the things that they had devised and begun, 
Manwe ordained a great feast; and the Valar and all their host came at his 



bidding. But Aule and Tulkas were weary; for the craft of Aule and the strength 
of Tulkas had been at the service of all without ceasing in the days of their 
labour. And Melkor knew of all that was done, for even then he had secret 
friends and spies among the Maiar whom he had converted to his cause; and far 
off in the darkness he was filled with hatred, being jealous of the work of his 
peers, whom he desired to make subject to himself. Therefore he gathered to 
himself spirits out of the halls of Ea that he had perverted to his service, and he 
deemed himself strong. And seeing now his time he drew near again to Arda, 
and looked down upon it, and the beauty of the Earth in its Spring filled him the 
more with hate. 

Now therefore the Valar were gathered upon Almaren, fearing no evil, and 
because of the light of Illuin they did not perceive the shadow in the north that 
was cast from afar by Melkor; for he was grown dark as the Night of the Void. 
And it is sung that in that feast of the Spring of Arda Tulkas espoused Nessa the 
sister of Orome, and she danced before the Valar upon the green grass of 
Almaren. 

Then Tulkas slept, being weary and content, and Melkor deemed that his hour 
had come. And he passed therefore over the Walls of the Night with his host, and 
came to Middle-earth far in the north; and the Valar were not aware of him. 

Now Melkor began the delving and building of a vast fortress, deep under 
Earth, beneath dark mountains where the beams of Illuin were cold and dim. 
That stronghold was named Utumno. And though the Valar knew naught of it as 
yet, nonetheless the evil of Melkor and the blight of his hatred flowed out 
thence, and the Spring of Arda was marred. Green things fell sick and rotted, and 
rivers were choked with weeds and slime, and fens were made, rank and 
poisonous, the breeding place of flies; and forests grew dark and perilous, the 
haunts of fear; and beasts became monsters of horn and ivory and dyed the earth 
with blood. Then the Valar knew indeed that Melkor was at work again, and they 
sought for his hiding place. But Melkor, trusting in the strength of Utumno and 
the might of his servants, came forth suddenly to war, and struck the first blow, 
ere the Valar were prepared; and he assailed the lights of Illuin and Ormal, and 
cast down their pillars and broke their lamps. In the overthrow of the mighty 
pillars lands were broken and seas arose in tumult; and when the lamps were 
spilled destroying flame was poured out over the Earth. And the shape of Arda 
and the symmetry of its waters and its lands was marred in that time, so that the 
first designs of the Valar were never after restored. 

In the confusion and the darkness Melkor escaped, though fear fell upon him; 
for above the roaring of the seas he heard the voice of Manwe as a mighty wind, 
and the earth trembled beneath the feet of Tulkas. But he came to Utumno ere 



Tulkas could overtake him; and there he lay hid. And the Valar could not at that 
time overcome him, for the greater part of their strength was needed to restrain 
the tumults of the Earth, and to save from ruin all that could be saved of their 
labour; and afterwards they feared to rend the Earth again, until they knew where 
the Children of Iluvatar were dwelling, who were yet to come in a time that was 
hidden from the Valar. 


Thus ended the Spring of Arda. The dwelling of the Valar upon Almaren was 
utterly destroyed, and they had no abiding place upon the face of the Earth. 
Therefore they departed from Middle-earth and went to the Land of Aman, the 
westernmost of all lands upon the borders of the world; for its west shores 
looked upon the Outer Sea, that is called by the Elves Ekkaia, encircling the 
Kingdom of Arda. How wide is that sea none know but the Valar; and beyond it 
are the Walls of the Night. But the east shores of Aman were the uttermost end 
of Belegaer, the Great Sea of the West; and since Melkor was returned to 
Middle-earth and they could not yet overcome him, the Valar fortified their 
dwelling, and upon the shores of the sea they raised the Pelori, the Mountains of 
Aman, highest upon Earth. And above all the mountains of the Pelori was that 
height upon whose summit Manwe set his throne. Taniquetil the Elves name that 
holy mountain, and Oiolosse Everlasting Whiteness, and Elerrina Crowned with 
Stars, and many names beside; but the Sindar spoke of it in their later tongue as 
Amon Uilos. From their halls upon Taniquetil Manwe and Varda could look out 
across the Earth even into the furthest East. 

Behind the walls of the Pelori the Valar established their domain in that region 
which is called Valinor; and there were their houses, their gardens, and their 
towers. In that guarded land the Valar gathered great store of light and all the 
fairest things that were saved from the ruin; and many others yet fairer they 
made anew, and Valinor became more beautiful even than Middle-earth in the 
Spring of Arda; and it was blessed, for the Deathless dwelt there, and there 
naught faded nor withered, neither was there any stain upon flower or leaf in that 
land, nor any corruption or sickness in anything that lived; for the very stones 
and waters were hallowed. 


And when Valinor was full-wrought and the mansions of the Valar were 
established, in the midst of the plain beyond the mountains they built their city, 
Valmar of many bells. Before its western gate there was a green mound, 
Ezellohar, that is named also Corollaire; and Yavanna hallowed it, and she sat 



there long upon the green grass and sang a song of power, in which was set all 
her thought of things that grow in the earth. But Nienna thought in silence, and 
watered the mould with tears. In that time the Valar were gathered together to 
hear the song of Yavanna, and they sat silent upon their thrones of council in the 
Mahanaxar, the Ring of Doom near to the golden gates of Valmar; and Yavanna 
Kementari sang before them and they watched. 

And as they watched, upon the mound there came forth two slender shoots; 
and silence was over all the world in that hour, nor was there any other sound 
save the chanting of Yavanna. Under her song the saplings grew and became fair 
and tall, and came to flower; and thus there awoke in the world the Two Trees of 
Valinor. Of all things which Yavanna made they have most renown, and about 
their fate all the tales of the Elder Days are woven. 

The one had leaves of dark green that beneath were as shining silver, and from 
each of his countless flowers a dew of silver light was ever falling, and the earth 
beneath was dappled with the shadows of his fluttering leaves. The other bore 
leaves of a young green like the new-opened beech; their edges were of 
glittering gold. Flowers swung upon her branches in clusters of yellow flame, 
formed each to a glowing horn that spilled a golden rain upon the ground; and 
from the blossom of that tree there came forth warmth and a great light. 
Telperion the one was called in Valinor, and Silpion, and Ninquelote, and many 
other names; but Laurelin the other was, and Malinalda, and Culurien, and many 
names in song beside. 

In seven hours the glory of each tree waxed to full and waned again to naught; 
and each awoke once more to life an hour before the other ceased to shine. Thus 
in Valinor twice every day there came a gentle hour of softer light when both 
trees were faint and their gold and silver beams were mingle. And each day of the 
Valar in Aman contained twelve hours, and ended with the second mingling of 
the lights, in which Faurelin was waning but Telperion was waxing. But the light 
that was spilled from the trees endured long, ere it was taken up into the airs or 
sank down into the earth; and the dews of Telperion and the rain that fell from 
Faurelin Varda hoarded in great vats like shining lakes, that were to all the land 
of the Valar as wells of water and of light. Thus began the Days of the Bliss of 
Valinor; and thus began also the Count of Time. 

